Evaluation of a Hybrid Hydrostatic Bearing
for Cryogenic Turbopump Application

Several test parameters were varied to characterize the bearing's steadystate operation. The rotation of the tester shaft was varied between 0 and
80 000 rpm. Bearing inlet fluid pressure was varied between 2.07 and 4.48 MPa
(300 and 650 psia), while the fluid sump pressure was independently varied
between 0.34 and 2.07 MPa (50 and 300 psia). 
The maximum radial load applied
to the bearing was 440 N (100 lbf). Measured hybrid-hydrostatic-bearing stiffness was 1.5 times greater than
predicted, while the fluid flow rate through the bearing was 35 to 05 percent
less than predicted. Under two-phase fluid conditions, the stiffness was even
greater and the flow rate was less. The optimal pressure ratio for the bearing
should be between 0.2 and 0.55 depending on the balance desired between bearing
efficiency and stiffness. Startup and shutdown cyclic tests were conducted to
demonstrate the ability of the hybrid-hydrostatic-bearing assembly to survive
at least a 300-firing-duty cycle. For a typical cycle, 
the shaft was accelerated to 50 000 rpm in 1.8 sec. The bearing operated for 331 start-stop cycles
without failure. The objective of this report is to evaluate a hybrid hydrostatic bearing
for cryogenic turbopump applications. The hybrid hydrostatic bearing tested
consisted of a palr of 20-mm angular-contact ball bearlngs encased ln a journal, whlch ln turn was supported by a fluid fl1m. 
The purpose of the ball
bearlngs was to prevent wear of the journal and of the hydrostatic bearing
prlor to pressurlzatlon at startup and durlng shutdown of the system. The size
of the bearlng and the operatlng conditions were selected to be compatible with
the operatlng requirements of an advanced technology turbopump. Llquld hydrogen was used as the working fluld wlth speeds to 80 000 rpm and radial loads
to 440 N (100 lbf). startup and shutdown cycllc tests were also conducted. 

variables para geometria o volumetrico; coef massico masa-volumen
BN bearing number, Re/GRAOP
C hydrostatic-bearing radial clearance, mm (in.)
Os hydrostatic-bearing surface diameter, mm (in.)
E eccentricity ratio, e/C
e eccentricity or journal deflection, mm (in.)
GRAOP modified Reynolds number based on axial pressure flow,
(GRAOPS)(PR)OS/(L - w)
GRAOPS Reynolds number based on axial pressure flow, (Ps - Pa)C3/R(p)v
K statlc stlffness, N/cm (lbf/in.)
K dlmenslonless stiffness, K(e)/(Ps - Pa)L(Ds)
L journal axial length, mm (in.)
LOFlO load-to-flow ratio, W(C 4)/e(m)v(L)Os
m mass flow rate through the hydrostatic bearing, g/sec (lbm/sec)
PR pocket pressure ratio, (Pr - Pa)/Ps - Pa)
Pa sump pressure, MPa (psia)
Pr pocket pressure, MPa (psia)
Ps bearing inlet pressure, MPa (psia)
R radius of the hydrostatic bearing, mm (in.)
Re Reynolds number, U(C)/2
U journal surface velocity, mm/sec (in./sec)
W load applled to the bearlng, N (lbf) 

W dimensionless load, W/(Ps - Pa)L(Ds)
w axial length of pocket, mm (in.)
a attitude angle, deg
~ inlet fluid viscosity, N sec/mm2 (lbf sec/in.2)
v inlet fluid kinematic viscosity, mm2/sec (in.2/sec)
APPARATUS
Test Bearing
A schematic of the hybrid-hydrostatic-bearing assembly and its design
details are shown in figure 1. Design details of the hybrid hydrostatic bearing were reported in reference 3. Table I contains critical dimensions of the
two hydrostatic-bearing configurations tested. Fabrication of two sets of
hardware resulted in some dimensional differences, mainly affecting the clearance between the journal and the hydrostatic bearing surface. Liquid hydrogen
was supplied to the hydrostatic bearing through twenty orifice-compensated
pockets that were arranged in two staggered rows of ten equally spaced pockets.
The rolling element of the hybrid bearing consisted of two angular-contact,
20-mm-bore ball bearings. The ball bearings, which were preloaded by a spring
washer, act at system startup and shutdown to prevent wear of the hydrostatic
bearing and at system startup to prevent high-friction torque. liquid-hydrogen temperatures and high speed depending on the materials
involved. Inconel 718 with a thin, dense chrome plating was used for the journal material, and 316 stainless steel with an electro-deposited silver plating
was used for the hydrostatic bearing. When thermal-expansion coefficients were
used for these materials, calculations indicated that a temperature decrease
from ambient to 21 K (37 OR) resulted in a O.Ol-mm (0.0004-in.)  finite-element analysis was used to calculate the
growth of the journal due to fluid pressure and centrifugal forces. The 0.066
mm (0.0026 in.) radial clearance of the hydrostatic bearing at ambient
conditions was reduced to 0.035 mm (0.0014 in.) at an operating temperature of
21 K (37 OR), a speed of 90 000 rpm, and a pressure of 1.7 MPa (250 psia). journal. The notch passed
under both probes once every cartridge revolution. Room-temperature calibrations were made by moving the journal a measured amount while recording dis- placement~probe output and then rotating the notch past the probe position.
This verified that the notch technique was valid and it also checked the linearity of the measurement system. Signal-conditioning electronics compensated
for the voltage shifts due to the extreme temperature variations. Since journal movements as small as 0.003 mm (0.0001 in.) could be detected and measured
using this measurement system, hydrostatic-bearing stiffness calculations 

er no-load conditions, is shown in figure 4 for the two
bearing configurations. At cryogenic temperatures and no rotational speed, the
clearances were 0.069 and 0.066 mm (0.0027 and 0.0026 in.) for configurations
1 and 2, respectively. At 90 000 rpm these clearances decreased to 0.043 and
0.035 mm (0.0017 and 0.0014 in.), respectively. 

Stiffness (in N/cm) = B.9lxl05 - 1.07xlOB C
Stiffness (in lbf/in.) = 5.05xl05 - 1.544x10B C
(C in cm)
(C in in.)

COMPARISON OF PREDICTED AND EXPERIMENTAL OPERATING CHARACTERISTlCS
The eccentricity e of a hybrid hydrostatic bearing can be defined as the
distance between the journal's center of rotation and the center of the hydrostatic bearing. Eccentricity ratio E is defined as the ratio of eccentricity
to radial clearance C:
e E = C
When the eccentricity ratio is equal to 1, contact between journal and
hydrostatic-bearing surfaces will occur. under simulated turbopump conditions without failure.
2. Measured fluid flow through the bearing was 35 to 55 percent less than
predicted .
. 3. Calculated bearing stiffness was 1.5 times greater than that predicted
using cryogenic liquid. Under two-phase fluid conditions, bearing stiffness
increased even further. 